Introduction
Healthcare has become one of India’s largest sectors - both in terms of revenue and employment. Healthcare comprises hospitals, medical devices, clinical trials, outsourcing, telemedicine, medical tourism, health insurance and medical equipment. The Indian healthcare sector is growing at a brisk pace due to its strengthening coverage, services and increasing expenditure by public as well private players.
Indian healthcare delivery system is categorised into two major components - public and private. The Government public healthcare system comprises limited secondary and tertiary care institutions in key cities and focuses on providing basic healthcare facilities in the form of primary healthcare centres (PHCs) in rural areas. The private sector provides majority of secondary, tertiary and quaternary care institutions with a major concentration in metros, tier I and tier II cities.
India's competitive advantage lies in its large pool of well-trained medical professionals. India is also cost competitive compared to its peers in Asia and Western countries. The cost of surgery in India is about one-tenth of that in the US or Western Europe.

Market Size & Budget
The healthcare market can increase three fold to Rs 8.6 trillion (US$ 133.44 billion) by 2022.
India is experiencing 22-25 per cent growth in medical tourism and the industry is expected to double its size from present (April 2017) US$ 3 billion to US$ 6 billion by 2018.
There is a significant scope for enhancing healthcare services considering that healthcare spending as a percentage of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) is rising. The government’s expenditure on the health sector has grown to 1.4 per cent in FY18E from 1.2 per cent in FY14. The Government of India is planning to increase public health spending to 2.5 per cent of the country's GDP by 2025.

Investment
The hospital and diagnostic centers attracted Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) worth US$ 5.25 billion between April 2000 and June 2018, according to data released by the Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion (DIPP). Some of the recent investments in the Indian healthcare industry are as follows:
Healthcare sector in India witnessed 23 deals worth US$ 679 million in H12018.
India and Cuba have signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) to increase cooperation in the areas of health and medicine, according to Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Government of India.
Fortis Healthcare has approved the de-merger of its hospital business with Manipal Hospital Enterprises. TPG and Dr. Ranjan Pal could invest Rs. 3,900 crore (US$ 602.41 million) in Manipal Hospital Enterprise.

Government Initiatives
Some of the major initiatives taken by the Government of India to promote Indian healthcare industry are as follows:
On September 23, 2018, Government of India launched Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana (PMJAY), to provide health insurance worth Rs 500,000 (US$ 7,124.54) to over 100 million families every year.
In August 2018, the Government of India has approved Ayushman Bharat-National Health Protection Mission as a centrally Sponsored Scheme contributed by both center and state government at a ratio of 60:40 for all States, 90:10 for hilly North Eastern States and 60:40 for Union Territories with legislature. The center will contribute 100 per cent for Union Territories without legislature.
The Government of India has launched Mission Indradhanush with the aim of improving coverage of immunisation in the country. It aims to achieve atleast 90 per cent immunisation coverage by December 2018 which will cover unvaccinated and partially vaccinated children in rural and urban areas of India.

Achievements
Following are the achievements of the government in the year 2017:
In 2017, the Government of India approved National Nutrition Mission (NNM), a joint effort of Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MoHFW) and the Ministry of Women and Child development (WCD) towards a life cycle approach for interrupting the intergenerational cycle of under nutrition.
As of September 23, 2018, the world’s largest government funded healthcare scheme, Ayushman Bharat was launched.
As of November 15, 2017, 4.45 million patients were benefitted from Affordable Medicines and Reasonable Implants for Treatment (AMRIT) Pharmacies.
As of December 15, 2017, the Government of India approved the National Medical Commission Bill 2017, it aims to promote area of medical education reform.

Road Ahead
India is a land full of opportunities for players in the medical devices industry. India’s healthcare industry is one of the fastest growing sectors and it is expected to reach $280 billion by 2020. The country has also become one of the leading destinations for high-end diagnostic services with tremendous capital investment for advanced diagnostic facilities, thus catering to a greater proportion of population. Besides, Indian medical service consumers have become more conscious towards their healthcare upkeep.
Indian healthcare sector is much diversified and is full of opportunities in every segment which includes providers, payers and medical technology. With the increase in the competition, businesses are looking to explore for the latest dynamics and trends which will have positive impact on their business. The hospital industry in India is forecasted to increase to Rs 8.6 trillion (US$ 132.84 billion) by FY22 from Rs 4 trillion (US$ 61.79 billion) in FY17 at a CAGR of 16-17 per cent.
India's competitive advantage also lies in the increased success rate of Indian companies in getting Abbreviated New Drug Application (ANDA) approvals. India also offers vast opportunities in R&D as well as medical tourism. To sum up, there are vast opportunities for investment in healthcare infrastructure in both urban and rural India.



Scenario in India

As compared to developed countries with proper emergency systems in place, there is no single system which could play amajor role in managing emergency medical services in India. There is a fragmented system in place to attend the emergencies in the country. 102 is the emergency telephone number for ambulance in parts of India. There aredifferent emergency numbers in India’s 28 states and seven Union Territories. Hospitals in the country provide different telephone numbers for ambulance services. Clearly, India is in need for proper emergency medical service that can be accessed from anywhere in the country. The existing fragmented system falls terribly short of meeting the demand.

Trauma continues to be one of the major causes of death in India. To avoid preventable deaths and disabilities, India has planned to have a common effective system that could provide emergency care with equity of access. In a bid to address this problem, The Centralised Accidents and Trauma Services (CATS) was set up by the Delhi Government in the early 1990s. This service was later expanded throughout the country. Unfortunately, it didn’t succeed despite having a toll free number (102) that was made available through various media.

More recently, NGOs (Non-Governmental Organisations) and hospitals have come forward to provide their own EMSs. There have been considerable efforts by states across India to develop emergency services. Organisations like Emergency Management and Research Institute (EMRI) and American Association of Physicians of Indian Origin (AAPI)’s EMS are banned by corporates. EMRI is an exception in the otherwise struggling EMS system.

EMRI was founded in 2005. To begin with, its operations were limited to Hyderabad and Andhra Pradesh with a vision of responding to 30 million emergencies and saving 1 million lives a year. EMRI handles medical, police and fire emergencies through its 108 emergency service. Satyam is the technology partner of EMRI. EMRI has also entered into PPP with Indian Emergency Number Authority, National Emergency Number Association, American Association of Physicians of Indian Origin (AAPI), Shock Trauma Centre, Stanford University USA, Singapore Health Services, City of Austin in Texas, USA and Government of Andhra Pradesh.

EMRI also comprises a research institute, which does medical research, systems research and operations research. Through this, EMRI provides research papers for prevention and management of emergencies. EMRI’s other services includes free medical advice on phone on another toll free number 104 with access to more than 200 medical doctors and several more paramedics. It has entered into a partnership with Stanford Hospital, the School of Medicine for training 150 paramedics and 30 paramedic instructors over a two-year period in India. Though a positive, this is unlikely to meet the demand for paramedics in the country. “So far neither of these two services in Mumbai (AAPI) or Hyderabad (EMRI) have the kind of human resources and massive training programmes needed”, concurs Dr N Bhaskara Rao, Chairman, Centre for Media Studies, New Delhi.

In 2007, with the extension of Ambulance Access for All (AAA)’s services, American Association of Physicians of Indian Origin (AAPI) founded Emergency Medical Service (EMS) for Mumbai. AAPI has collaborated with the Confederation of Indian Industries (CII) and signed an MoU to endorse the growth of the healthcare sector in India, especially in rural areas. This agreement is to provide knowledge and technology transfer and provide EMSs to develop healthcare facilities in India.

Another such facility, Life Support Ambulance Service (LSAS) operating in Mumbai for three years in association with London Ambulance Service, UK, has now made inroads into Kerala and has 500 ambulances that can be reached on a toll free number 1298.

Recently, the Gujarat state government set up the Gujarat Emergency Medical Services Authority (GEMSA). Institute of Kidney Diseases and Research Centre (IKDRC), U.N. Mehta Institute of Cardiology and Research Centre, Gujarat Cancer Research Institute (GCRI), EMRI and Public Health Institute, Gandhinagar have entered into several other PPP projects to improve the emergency services in the state.

But these examples are far and few in a largely fragmented system. The lack of a common emergency number across the country is a major hurdle in creating a reliable emergency service. The fact that there isn’t clarity in the Ministry of Health about the importance of a common EMS does not help either. Says Dr Rao, “The Ministry does not have basic data on ambulances for emergency medical services in the country. This is despite the state-wise studies on ‘health infrastructure’ that were conducted recently.” Clearly, there is an urgent need to appraise the situation and implement corrective measures that can help put in place the required infrastructure as soon as possible.

Meeting the demand?

In spite of the work going on in the area of EMS, the question still remains: is it meeting the requirements? The answer is no. Though there has been a considerable improvement in emergency services in India, but there is still a long way to go before a comprehensive EMS is implemented across the country. “Available emergency services are not sufficient to meet the demand as one ambulance is needed to cover a population of 50,000 to 100,000,” says Mr Venkat Changavalli, CEO, EMRI. Still numerous deficiencies exist in the emergency services across the country. “India should have far more accessible and reliable emergency medical services irrespective of geographical factors,” says Dr Rao.
Another important component missing in the current system, and one that will be needed in the long-run, is a body to regulate the EMS in the country. “LSAS in Mumbai claims that it had saved 22,000 lives in three years while EMRI in Hyderabad claims saving 55,000 lives in one year,” says Dr Rao, but there is no way to validate these claims and introduce corrective measures.

Awareness

Awareness of the available services and preparedness are mandatory among the general public for the success of an EMS service. People also need to take initiative in knowing about the services being provided by available EMS. Indeed, an EMS that people are not aware of is as good as non-existent. One of the reasons for the success of EMRI is that 108 is widely recognised and has a great recall among citizens. “People’s participation is as important as blood donation and such cooperation is an important aspect of emergency medical relief service,” says Dr Rao. In 2006, American Academy for Emergency Medicine in India (AAEMI) made efforts to educate, impart knowledge and expertise to emergency care workers in Indian hospitals. It was aimed to increase the awareness and importance of Emergency Medicine. But this and other similar programmes are restricted to a few regions. Thus arose a need for an awareness creation programme across the nation that filled this gap.

Legislation for emergency services

The demand for legislation for EMS has been rising steadily in India. Supporters of such legislation opine that it would mandate a common access number, formation of an EMS council, trained paramedics, gradation of ambulance and hospitals, network of hospitals and define physical and human resources needed for the service. This could help save lives by making access easy for all the patients. Methods, technology, personal skills need to be standardised with formation of legislation in emergency services to provide protection for the providers.
Associations like Society of Emergency Medicine-India (SEMI) and American Association of Physicians of Indian Origin (AAPI) have submitted proposals for EMS legislation to the Central Government and State Government of Gujarat, Maharashtra and Andhra Pradesh. A word of caution comes from Dr Rao as he says “making emergency medical service legally compulsory without ground level preparedness will not be enough.” He adds that people need to be aware of their responsibilities towards fellow citizens—insist on and be aware of the best emergency service available.

Conclusion

The importance of a reliable EMS cannot be overemphasised, especially in India where the government has the responsibility of caring for a majority of the population. It can be argued that a nation of a billion people has been deprived of a decent EMS for too long now and it is high time the government takes definitive action. The success of a few services is evident enough of the need for EMS and what it will take to ensure that it works as expected. In a healthcare system that is sprouting and experiencing the benefits of involving private players, a public-private partnership framework could be the right way forward for policy-makers. At a time when the emphasis on preventing damage is greater than ever, the provision of pre-hospital care will be the key to ensure that lives are not lost due to avoidable circumstances.
